The ash grove how graceful, how plainly 'tis speaking
The wind through it playing has language for me.
Whenever the light through its branches is breaking,
A host of kind faces is gazing at me. I've solved the riddle. 
Can you believe it?
I have been trying to solve the bloody thing,
since…
Oh! Look at that. (shows leg) Quite nasty… I used to scream at the sight of my own blood, as a child, did you? But somehow as an adult, it soothes me—lets me know I'm—not made of… Plasticine—does that sound koo koo?
He breathes in.
Smell the roses on that breeze. Oh they smell so… red, don't they?
You know, this is my first moment of peace since the invasion.
And, in case you're wondering, that's why I am hiding. Hiding in Harrowdown Hill. Sounds like a children's book. Looks like one too, doesn't it? All these ash and oak trees, little woodland creatures running about, wildflowers everywhere mad scientist hiding.
It's the best hiding place in the world, don't you agree? Ohh! Did you ever play sardines, as a child? I did, it was my favourite hide and seek game—how you'd start out all by yourself and one by one they18would quietly find you and squish in, and you'd be this big squished group all just breathing, trying not to giggle while the last seeker walked round and round, calling out. I loved that game. I loved… hiding. The idea of being… invisible, you know? There and yet not there? The way I am now.
Oh, they will never find me.
Not behind that thorny thicket.
Not the baddies.
Nor the good…
Until tomorrow morning.
They'll find me about eight o'clock.
And I'll be dead by then.
Dead at first light.
D-E-A-D.
I can't fathom it, can you? I mean, as a scientist, I know it to be true, I know exactly what's going on inside my body, how long it will take for my liver to fail, the loss of blood to have its effect. I know that if I am not found, I will certainly die, and I accept this, fully, but you see… I can't imagine… it. It's the—forever part that stumps me. I mean, it would be one thing if I was dying just for a while, even for five or six years, until this whole mess in Iraq is over, as long as I knew I would be coming back, it would be fine, I could cope with that…. The idea of never ever… seeing orange juice again, or my daughter's eyes, or wild honeysuckle… the never never neverness of it all, you know?
If someone had told me when I was sixteen, "David Kelly you will die in a forest when you are fifty-nine, after your fifteen minutes of world fame"—I wouldn't have believed either… the forest or the fame.
Me? The quiet little Welsh boy? How could I ever be of consequence in the world?
Perhaps I'll come back as a great spotted woodpecker, make lots of noise, and fly anywhere I want to. I always did love flying dreams, do you have them? Perhaps it'll be like that.19I'm sure it'll be like that.
Yes.So it's not so bad for me. It's them.
My wife. My daughters. My sister.
The shock.
The… shock.
The loss, I suppose. The grief.
The tawdry… talk, all the bloody nattering.
"Oh, yes, remember that mousey British scientist Kelly? He killed hisself. Remember? He was the weapons inspector who got himself into all that trouble blabbing to the BBC? Saying there were no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, calling Tony Blair a stinking liar—they found him, dead, in the forest."
Was it suicide?
Or WAS IT MURDER?
Some will say it was bloody murder, it was MI6, it was the Iraqis it was the Italian Secret Service, the CIA.
They will cite the email I wrote this morning to my friend, Judy. "There are many dark actors playing games." The other emails I wrote this morning show I was fine. I was strong. Very excited to go back to my beloved Iraq. My work is not finished yet. I have no psychiatric history whatsoever. After all I've left no notes. For my family. Whom I love. Whom I… adore…. Why, oh why would I take my own life? Others will say it was certainly suicide. There will be an inquiry, which will declare to the world that yes, of course it was suicide.
That sad little Walter Mitty of a man just couldn't take the pressure. The pills, (He points them out.) they will say, are proof positive— two co-proxamol will be found in my stomach; they will point out the slashes on my wrist, the ulnar vein cut, the knife that made the slashes, a knife I was given when I was twelve years old… they will say I was a man defeated: the brutal interrogations, the bloodthirsty press, the threat of being terminated. I was depressed, exhausted and in despair. I was a weak man, a meek man, poor in character, of course I committed suicide.
But almost nobody will believe it. There will be a rock song by a member of the band Radiohead, art installations by angry Germans, television movies and the Internet will roil with talk of the murder of David Kelly by men in black. That's how I'll be remembered. The mousey scientist who set off a storm. Another casualty of the War in Iraq. After all, what is one fifty-nine-year-old slightly potty scientist? Hundreds of British lads have been killed already. Hundreds of thousands of Iraqis. Why should I make a noise? Many men don't make it to my age anyhow; I've had a good go.
When we are young, our death is impossible… we see our end as a calamity, don't we? Like the sinking of the Titanic. Part of the… salve of aging, is that our death starts to make a sort of sense. Like one's child going off to university. Yes, it's a bit sad, but not tragic. It's as things should be.
Evensong from a church in the village—or bells.
Is this too much to ask? That you witness my death?
It's a terrible thing to ask, I know.
But… I am asking.Because…. Well, I don't want to be alone. Is that weak?
I can't have my loved ones here because, of course, they would revive me.
Do you remember Bobby Sands? He and some other IRA fellows they were on a hunger strike for better conditions in prison, and they insisted their wives and mothers and sons and daughters promise them that when they became unconscious, they would not be revived. An almost impossible promise to make, can you imagine? But the family of Bobby Sands, they kept their word. Maggie Thatcher, of course, didn't give way. And Bobby Sands died.
Does his death have meaning? I believe… that it does. After all, he is remembered.
You see, this might be the only way I can have an impact, the only way I can make up for what I did not do.
Beat.
I'm beginning to think that it's the greatest sin of our time.
Knowing, and pretending that we don't know, so that we won't be inconvenienced in any way. Do you understand what I am saying?
I knew. Oh the things I knew.
And I did nothing.Can you imagine, knowing, knowing that a man is torturing a child in your basement, and just going on with your life? Knowing it is happening right under your feet, as you wait for the kettle to boil, as you tuck your own children in bed, as you work in the garden the dim light is always there, the muffled sound of her screaming, you pretend to yourself "It's the crows on the line," but in your belly you know it is her agony, he is cutting off her fingers one by one, pulling out her eyes, her teeth, unimaginable torture and this is something you know for certain, others may guess at it, many deny it, but you know it for certain and you don't tell anyone because you might lose something if you do. Your carefree life, your ability to be happy, your job. Your job. And if you lose your job you lose your pension. And you don't want to lose your pension. They said, they admitted they needed to sex it up, for the people, the people of Britain were not going to send their boys to a war they didn't believe in, they would tie them down rather than see them go, they said we had to fill the people with fear, we had to remind them of World War II, they had to understand that the threat of Saddam was like the threat of the Nazis. We all knew that this was not true. We all knew that the casus belli was a lie. What could we do, we had no power, we just shook our heads, and scurried away, little mouse men. We were not to talk; we had taken a vow of secrecy, if we wanted to hold onto our jobs, we had to keep our mouths shut. So. I put my head in the sand.
I told myself "I am for the invasion, Saddam is a monster no doubt about that, regime change is a must. The people will dance in the streets, if only for a day," I told myself: "They are good men, Bush and Blair, and Berlusconi. They want good for the people, they will topple Saddam, give aid to the new government, and be on their way."
I told myself lies.
Have you ever?
Have you ever told yourself an unforgivable lie?
Long beat.
A few weeks before the invasion, a friend of mine, the American ambassador to Sweden asked me what would happen to me, if Iraq were invaded and do you know what I answered? I said I would probably be found dead in the woods. They'll make much of that, after my death. It'll be all over the Internet. And the funny thing is, I can't explain it. I was making a kind of morbid joke. But maybe I knew something that I didn't know I knew, you know?
At the start of the war I would wake up at six, watch the news every morning, from my bed, each day's smooth, velvety-voiced account of bombings, and casualties, and "collateral damage," I watched, hoping against hope that things would… would improve, but it soon became very clear to me that things were far, far, far, far worse for the Iraqi people than even I could have imagined.
What did I do?
Did I go scream in the streets?
Did I write to the papers?
No.
I did nothing. Nothing at all.
I became… clumsy. Yes, that was the only giveaway, I burned myself on the stove, I cut myself chopping onions, and I fell flat on my face on the pavement, I crashed into people in hallways, sat on my glasses, dropped the phone constantly, dropped and broke plates, couldn't eat without dribbling, staining all of my shirts with food, I was in great demand. Flying to conferences all over the world. With stained shirts and broken glasses. The truth about Weapons of Mass Destruction that's what everyone wanted to know, I skirted the truth, bobbed and weaved but I loved to hear my own voice. Loved to be regarded as the expert the world expert on biological weapons; I was even nominated for a Nobel Peace prize, for my work in Russia, ten years before: uncovering Stalinist secrets, disarming the next Black Plague and that is how they always introduced me, I talked to the press incessantly, my words always precise, witty, always filtered, always bloody lies. Walked through a screen door in Houston, Texas, and fell into a river in Bern. Bit my tongue constantly. That was maybe the worst.
And then one day, one sunny June morning I was in New York City just leaving the U.N. I received a phone call, from my dear old friend Jalal. He owned a bookshop in Baghdad, called Al Nakhla, in English, the Date Palm Tree it was my favourite bookshop in the world, and I have been to almost all of them, no, I truly have! It's what I do in my downtime, wherever I am—well Jalal is one of the most kind and joyful and learned men I have ever known, he had about five degrees in literature he had thousands of books. And he had read all of them. He had books that were hundreds of years old, written in blood; he had giant books it would take three men to lift, tiny books with pages like moth's wings that would fit in the palm of your hand, they smelled of history, books in every language, illustrations that would make you weep, each room had a theme, the art of Babylon, American cowboys, Chinese fantasy, Antarctic cuisine, everything you can imagine, it was a kind of magical labyrinth, and the delicious cooking smells, of kubbeh and mint filling the shop—I would browse for hours, in a kind of trance and then, Jalal would insist I stay to dinner, with his family, oh, you would love his family—Marwa, well Marwa, and she wouldn't mind me saying this at all, is sort of an Arabic Lucille Ball—she would turn the act of getting ice out of the fridge into this huge comic routine, have us all on the floor shouting with laughter—and she was an amazing cook, and their daughter, Sahar. I think she had just turned thirteen last time I saw them, she was obsessed with Anne of Green Gables her life's dream was to dye her hair carrot red and to visit Prince Edward Island, in Canada, we hatched a plan, to bring the whole family on a ship to the Island and rent a farmhouse together for a summer, we were really going to do it, and Tabarek—the naughtiest five-year-old boy in the universe had to climb everything he saw—tables, fridges, walls, people, I became… so… so close to this family, bringing gifts for them all, never the right gifts of course, I'm terrible at gifts, being treated to little plays and songs, I loved that family, they became, in a way, my best friends in the world. He said they were watching her. Sahar, his 13-year-old, she was a very pretty girl, like a magazine model, I suppose, tall for her age, beautiful smile, a woman's figure but still very much a little girl, a happy child who loved her stuffed animals, and he said the American soldiers were watching her. He said they looked at her like a wolf looks at a rabbit. They were ravenous. There was evil in their eyes, he said, Blood. He said he planned to move her the next day, to take her to another town, to stay with her cousins. He wanted to know if I could speak to24someone. I said I was sorry, but there really wasn't anyone I could speak to, even if they had been British. And then I reassured him. I told him not to worry; I said they were probably bored young hicks from Alabama who couldn't put two words together. Intimidating young girls—their only entertainment. I reassured him that they were carefully monitored by their commanding officers, and they would never dare approach her. "If you could only see their eyes," he said. Even when he was with her, they would look her up and down, and say what were clearly crude things and laugh. She would go home and cry in her mother's arms. I told him again not to worry. I was sure everything would be fine. Not two days later, according to the New York Times, four American soldiers confronted Jalal and his daughter Sahar outside his bookshop. Took them inside. Said they were looking for weapons. For insurgents. "There are only books, please take all the books you want," said Jalal. Once in the shop, two of them took Sahar aside. The other two rounded up Marwa and Tabarek, took them with Jalal into the basement. And shot them. The killer climbed the stairs and said, "I've killed them. They're all dead." And then the four soldiers threw Sahar to the floor, raped the child. Put a bayonet through the child and shot her in the face.
They then set fire to the bookshop.
He is having trouble breathing.
The press initially said it was the work of insurgents.
"The terrorists." Until two other soldiers from the same battalion as the killers were captured, and beheaded on camera. One of the four killers, tormented with guilt over his comrades deaths, certain it had been revenge for the murders, confessed. Well. The day I heard what happened to my beloved friends was the day I blew myself up. Was the day I met Andrew Gilligan of the BBC and I told him the truth.
To hell with vows of secrecy, professional confidentiality.
To hell with my pension.To hell with my life as I know it.
The truth the truth must out.
He yells.
I want to tell the TRUUUUUUUUUUUUTH.
The truth the truth the truth the truth the awful horrible terrible.
Truth truth truth truth truth truth truth.
And out it poured.
Whatever he asked me? I told him the truth.
Yes I had seen the dossier before the invasion.
Yes I had had serious concerns.
And yes they ignored them.
And yes they lied to the people.
And yes tell the world.And you know how it went, he told the world, he shouted it out but I was his secret, his secret source. And just when he was about to be sent to prison for not revealing his source I did the right thing, I wrote the letter.
The letter to the ministry explaining that I was the source.
I was the source and I was not ashamed. I am not ashamed. I naively believed they would protect me: they threw me to the hounds. I was ready. I sat before Parliament on the hottest day in ten years, I was lashed, I was blasted, I had crashed through the looking glass; I was confused and exhausted, and I could barely be heard. I could not raise my voice. They even turned off the air conditioning so that I could be heard. Everyone was wilting. "Will you speak up please?" I was not capable. I was a tired old man and I wanted to go home. They very nearly defeated me. But do you really think, do you really think I am so pathetically poor in character that I would kill myself because the parliamentarians BULLIED me? When I had so much left to do? When I have a family I worship? Listen: Do you say that a soldier who loses his life in the name of freedom, truth and compassion, has killed himself?
When I finally talked, told the truth, I knew that I was risking my life. And I knew, absolutely, that it was worth it. I accept what has happened, do you understand?
I accept what has happened. I sat in my chair this morning and I made a choice. I made a choice to stop—fighting; to allow whatever was to happen to happen. Because I realized that they would never ever leave me alone. What I had done, in their minds, was treason. I would be like what's his name, that character in Greek mythology that is tied to a rock in the ocean and is doomed to have his liver pulled out by ferocious vultures every day for eternity—they would never ever leave me in peace. The only way to defeat them is to disappear, do you understand? To be present, but invisible. Like hide and seek. I'm here. But you can't touch me. I see you, but you don't see me. I am the ghost of Harrowdown Hill.
I hope it's a searcher who finds me. Please let it not be my daughter. She does know my walking routes. We have walked this route together, many a Sunday afternoon, although never this far. Never through thickets. Is that her calling me? Or is that my imagination? Please God let it not be my daughter.
What time is it? Four forty-two in the morning now. The police are everywhere, and I can feel the fear in my family. I hear their worried voices. I am so… deeply sorry that it has to be this way.I hope, I know that they will understand. And one day they will see clearly that although I look as though I've lost, I have won. I have solved the riddle.
A song: there is a song that I need to sing, a song that I used to sing when I walked with my daughter. Searching for buttercups:A… dahh dahh dumm. Yes, yes, that's the melody. La laaa… yes.
Breathing is quite difficult now. My organs are failing.
Less oxygen in my blood, heart tired out.
Thank you. Thank you for witnessing… it won't be long now.
Within a few hours, my flesh and blood body will cease.
But I, David Kelly, I am here, and I promise, I will always be here.
He weakly sings:
The ash grove how graceful, how plainly 'tis speaking
The wind through it playing has language for me.
Whenever the light through its branches is breaking,
A host of kind faces is gazing at me.
He falls asleep, into a coma.
Blackout.