One of my earliest memories is drawing in my own blood.
Drawing a flower, a daffodil for the school nurse. Looking back,
I can't imagine why they were taking the blood of a child at school.
It wasn't enough to send to a lab, just enough to draw a daffodil.
I drew a daffodil because that is my name:
Nehrjas. "Daffodil" in Arabic.
My Western friends tell me that there is no such name in English, although there are many of flower names.
There is Rose.There is Dahlia.
There is Lily.
There is Violet.
There is Viola.
I laughed when my British friend said to me "Now what is the correct spelling of your name, dear." How can you talk of correct spelling when you transcribe Arabic into English? It is phonetics only.
What is fascinating to me is that women are names of flowers, but not all flowers; because if you are English and you are named Daffodil people will laugh. That is what my friends have told me. And if they want to insult a man, say to a man that he is not masculine, they call him "pansy" but not rose. Or tulip. And another thing I have observed is that a woman is never called after a tree. Only a flower. Because the purpose of a flower is to attract a bee.
And the tree,
The tree stands alone.
Blissfully—alone.
The tree provides air.
And shelter.
And food.
So I think, all mothers should be given a second name after a tree.
Do you see the tree outside my window? Ah, isn't that a beautiful view? I can see the whole world from here.
This tree, this is a date palm or the Nakhla. So tall, elegant, proud and beautiful, and how should I say it—enduring much like a woman. A fully-grown tree, like a fully-grown woman does not need much of anything, save a little rain now and then. Like me: Some people feel sorry, "She is old, she is over fifty now, can't attract a man," are you joking with me? You think I want to attract a man? Oh yes I am dying to wash his feet and make his bed and cook and clean and soothe him and praise him and say he is so strong and sexy and smart and bury myself alive! Although I loved—adored— my husband, he was an extraordinary man… I will tell you about this later… it was only once I was all alone that I could live in the land of myself. People ask me "Aren't you lonely, with your husband dead and your children elsewhere? Surely you will die of loneliness." I am not lonely; I am a full-grown tree.
Just as the leaves breathe out into the air and fill it with healing substances I breathe out my memories, good and bad. It is not company I want. It is to bring back what I can never bring back. And anyway: You will know that I deserve to be alone. For I have committed the greatest sin of all.
She takes a drink of water, or does a chore.
So, the date palm tree. When she has age, she doesn't need much. But, when she is young, she requires a great deal of special attention to truly flourish and bear fruit. Like every young girl, like my30daughters, oh so much attention or else they wilt like flowers in the heat and have such anger and screaming at their mother. Every year, an—arbourist, is that the word? Good for me, ah? Has to climb up each tree at least four times. I watch them from this window. It is one of my greatest joys. The lowest row of drying leaves must be removed of course, sometimes I lean out and I would say "You missed one, right there!" and then in April this tree has to be— pollinated. In August, the dangling dates have to be positioned—so they are supported. Otherwise they just—you know—hang down and be ruined.
In September or October, the dates are harvested. Such a happy time. It is an amusing puzzle to me that in the West dates are only eaten by the average person in something you call "date squares." They say they are too sweet and rich for the Western palate and yet what about this "fudge"? When I was in America they sold this fudge everywhere. Is this not over-sweet and over-rich and over-creamy with zero nutritional value?
I don't get it.
English is a funny language. How is it permissible to say the idiom "I don't get it," but if you were to say, "I don't catch it," the whole room laughs.
So. Back to blood. One of the exhibits at the Umm Al-Maarik Mosque in central Baghdad was a copy of the Koran written in Saddam Hussein's own blood. This is ironic. This is blasphemic. Why do not the heavens rain tears and the earth vomit blood at this outrage? The Holy Book written in the blood of the Devil?
I wonder who told him to do that? Or did he think of it himself?
Did a mullah demand of him to do this, as a proof of his love of Allah?
Or did his mother or his wife say to him you must appease the mullahs or they will defeat you? Because they will defeat you. If they want to defeat you.
They are as water, which eventually defeats everything.
Silence.
Is there anything more powerful than the love of God?
I want to tell you a secret. Before I had babies I did not really believe in God.
I said that I did. Everyone thought me very religious. I went to the mosque. I prayed five times a day. I observed all the rituals: the food, the dress, all of it.
But in my heart? In my secret thoughts? I did not believe. I thought to myself I thought maybe this is mass delusion. As Karl Marx has said, "the opiate of the people." And then I hated myself for even thinking that: "Who do you think you are," and I would smack myself in the face. I wanted to believe. I prayed to Allah to help me believe in him. I prayed so hard I drew blood from my lip. But He would give me no help. And I felt like an imposter.
Pretending. I would never tell my secret to anyone. Even my husband.
Because an infidel has no friends.
My soul was an empty space. Until
I had my first child… a son,
I looked at him and I saw Allah.
I cannot explain this—it is beyond words.
My faith came back like a great river, which has been dry and begins again to flow. And every time I felt it drying up, because of the terrible the unspeakable things that were happening to my people. I looked at the face of my son, and my faith returned. Listen, no matter how bad things get in your country—I know you have your terrible sex and blood crimes—there are many gang shootings and your prisons are full, but you cannot I do not want to be rude but I am telling you that you cannot even begin to imagine what life was like under Saddam Hussein. To even say his name it makes my stomach sick. And I will not offend any of God's creatures by calling him a beast. There is only one word for such an evil human being. Shaytaan. Satan. Because Satan means to me the human embodiment of evil.
And I do not mean by this ignorance.
I remember the day of the coup. I was in a taxicab; he was taking me to school. I was a high school teacher then, when I was a young32mother. The radio was on but I was not listening. Suddenly the cab driver stopped. He got out of the car.
He cried, "All of Iraq is burning," the Baathists, with the support of the CIA, had killed the president and all the ministers.
We were entering the age of darkness.
I laughed out loud when Saddam's statue was toppled. And I cheered when the Devil was turned into the rodent he truly was and captured in the claws of the Eagle. I was overjoyed to see elections: hopeful. I would like to have voted. I thought maybe, maybe there is at last some light. But this moment of light and hope was an illusion, how stupid was I, ah? To think for even one moment that life might be better? That the Americans and their murderous brothers the British cared about us, about our freedom, our children? This hope was a flash, a lightning flash in the pitch dark, and it is gone.
Iraq is once again hell.
Could hell be as bad?Those who supposedly came to liberate us… it reminds me of a young woman I know who had been taken off the street one day by officials and raped many many times. At the end of the day they threw her out of the car to the side of the road, in the countryside. She crawled along, bruised and bleeding, half naked, and soon, a car stopped. A very kind and gentle man with his family stopped and helped her to the car. The wife covered her and they took her to their home nearby and the wife drew a bath for her and said they would call her family while she cleaned herself and rested. As the children played in the house, the man sneaked into the bathroom and raped her again in the bath. She did not cry out because she did not want to embarrass his family. And when her own family arrived, thanking this man so profusely, bringing him gifts—
Those who say they have come to save us have come to destroy us.
So. My sin. Hal Haram. The worst sin of all.
On the day of the Devil—the Baathist Coup, they rounded up anybody they believed was a threat. That day, my husband went into hiding. I myself was arrested at work, taken from the school, interrogated and after a few days released. My mother thank god was33with the children. Oh yes! Everyone we knew was put in prison for a time; anybody who was thinking, intellectual, active. Anyone who was political and could be a threat. Anybody who was a member of the Communist Party.
Everyone I knew was a member of the Communist Party. Wait. I can see you are pulling away from me when I say "Communist." But this is not the Communist Party of Stalin, or Mao or Pol Pot, or post-war Europe, far far from it.
All of the kind and thinking and peace loving people in Iraq at that time were members of the Communist Party. You would all have been members of the Communist Party. Oh yes. Ask anyone now. The Communist Party was the only one that welcomed people of all religions and backgrounds. And it was the only party prepared to fight to the death to free the people.
It broke our hearts that the United States land of the free, home of the brave—liberty and justice for all was supporting the coup. After the coup, the CIA gave the secret police a list of the names of everyone in the Communist Party; they were making the Baath army, and their torturers all-powerful we had to be very secretive. We had to let our babies cry at night so that their cries would cover the sound of typing. If the secret police heard typing, they would arrest us immediately. One day they took my little brother. He was a silly boy, he liked to dance with girls and drink alcohol and wear expensive clothing and he was at the university. He was taken.We did not know where he was. We received a phone call in the morning. "We are sending him home in a taxi." We waited all day. The taxi arrived. The taxi driver said Allah akh bar. "There is a God"—because my brother was, incredibly, still alive.
We rushed him into the house because if the neighbours saw they would shun us—they would be afraid of guilt by association. And he—he was so badly beaten we couldn't recognize his face, and he, he could see nothing. My other brother cried and my mother said, "Don't cry! This is the way men learn to be men." It seems harsh, but you have to understand the way we lived, and what it was to be a man.
So, the monsters we lived in fear of were the Baath secret police, "Jihaz Haneen." If you can believe it, in English? The Instruments of Yearning. Can you explain that to me please? The torture jail was a fairytale castle, from long ago where the king had lived—we had not liked him either, he was Saudi but he was nothing compared to Saddam. The gardens were tended by a master gardener, a true genius of nature. And so the castle was called The Palace of Flowers. Until the Dark Age. When it became The Palace of the End.
"Qasr al-Nihayah." Iraq's own house of horrors; our children weren't afraid of fictional witches or monsters, those stories are only for peaceful places, our children had nightmares about the Palace of the End. "O people of Iraq…. By God, I shall strip you like bark, I shall truss you like a bundle of twigs, I shall beat you like stray camels…. By God, what I promise, I fulfill; what I purpose, accomplish; what I measure, I cut off."
So said al-Hadjadj, the newly arrived governor of Iraq, in the year 694.
So said Saddam.
So said George Bush and Tony Blair.
And here we are. So.
As I said, my husband had been in hiding ever since the coup, as he, at that time was the great, visionary leader of the Communist Party. Oh yes! He was a beautiful and courageous man. He had a huge popular support, and he was poised to begin a revolution. Yes, it would have taken years, but it would have happened, and so many lives would have been saved. We all believed fervently in this revolution. Watching our friends and loved ones disappear or at best be tortured beyond recognition, it gave us hope. So we would do anything to protect this possibility.
You must understand that countless lives depended upon our success.
Hah. I just thought of an amusing story. A friend of mine who lives in America now, he was in Washington D.C. at a party or event and the wife of U.S. Ambassador to Iraq in the sixties and seventies said of the Baathist coup: "It was a terrible time, my God we lost all our electricity. We had to go around by candlelight and it was freezing at night." My friend just laughed and laughed. He said: "Madam, for you it was electricity. For us it was death."
So imagine me, a young and very beautiful woman. Well it's true. You see me now, in my fifties, I am a handsome woman. But then? Kullish Helwa! I have pictures. I had now four children. My son, fifteen, Nahdne. I had a two years old girl, Laila, and a precious eight years old son, Fahdil, the light of my life, my helper, my inspiration, my mischievous monkey. Also, I was eight months pregnant.
Well. One day, as I knew they would, they came for us. Thank God they let my mother take Laila, but they took Nahdne from school, and me from my home.
I had been boiling an egg. To have with a date. It's true. And in came the thugs.And you know who they were? You might wonder, who were these secret police? How did they collect so many eager criminals and sadists? Well I tell you they were the local bullies. One of them I recognized, he used to bother me when my brother and I went to the movies. He would harass me, say filthy things, and my brother gave him a warning. That's who it was, the losers, the ones who would torture animals, those people you avoid. So. They took us to the prison.
I remember thinking thank God they do not have Fahdil—he will know when he comes back to an empty house he will know to go to the neighbours. He had been carrying some mail from one house to another. Young boys would always do that for us they were so fast and so small. So we are driving up to the castle.
Like an American horror movie. Now, the castle has three stories. The highest floor is where they would take you to talk. The surroundings were quite nice. A reasonable conversation. If you were willing to talk, then you talked you betrayed everyone you knew, and you were free to go. Sadly, some were so afraid of torture that they talked immediately. I don't judge anyone. Everyone is different, and torture changes everything. Then, if you didn't wish to talk, they would send you down to main floor. It was what we call Torture Lite.
Beatings. Broken bones. Nails removed. That kind of thing. And if you still didn't talk, you were sent to the basement. There were bodies everywhere. Bodies of people you knew. Once you have smelled the smell of death, of mass murder and suffering, nothing smells sweet again, not ever again. The memory—not the memory, the actual smell… remains always, somewhere in every breath you take. So. At first we were sent to the highest floor. And we refused to speak. So after an hour or so we were sent to the first floor. A small room. Me, my fifteen-year-old son. And my torturers. The first thing they did. They held my belly in their hands. They laughed. And they said "Who did this to you?" I turned to my son. I said, "Do not listen to them. They are half men." And then I said, "It is the child of my husband." And they asked to me "Where is your husband?" I said that I did not know. They started only by jumping on my feet. And hitting my son's nose with a hammer. They hit him until he could not feel it. So he stopped crying out. And then they stopped hitting him, because they knew it did not hurt anymore.
We were… inside hell now. I only prayed I would not lose the baby. My son and I looked at each other. I knew he would be strong. This went on for hours.
Needless to say I was raped many times in front of my son. They forced him to watch. But he did not see. His eyes looked into my eyes only. So wise for fifteen.
And then, when I thought they will let us go. At this point they did not want to be seen killing women, especially pregnant women, or children. They were trying to win the hearts and minds of the people still. And this is what is taboo in every culture in the world I think. The last taboo. And just at that moment when the head torturer said to me, "We will let you go, but next time…" in through the door comes another with my eight years old son Fahdil. They had caught him as he was running with the mail. Someone must have pointed him out to them. Someone had betrayed us. They had blindfolded him. He was very frightened of the dark. They had beaten him about the face even before bringing him in. My son. They let me embrace him once. First: they asked him to tell them where was his father. He said he didn't know. He had been well trained. Then they began to beat me again. And rape me again. To scare him into speaking. To protect his mother. But he knew. I turned my face to him to make sure he was alive and you know what he did? He smiled at me. He kept smiling to give me courage. And he was eight years old.
Fi 'aalamen azlamat marayaahu
Ayyu nashidehn lam yanbajas 'aassalan
Wa anta tafar fi sanayaahu
In a world whose mirrors are dimmed 37
What song did not flow with honey
If you were to smile your praise upon it?
—Nazik al-Mala'ika: a great Iraq poetess
So. They began to torture my son Fahdil. They said all we want to know is where is your father. You tell us you can have bread and water. About six hours later. He said he would tell them. I was almost relieved. But then he told them a lie. They gave him bread and water while the others went to find my husband.
He whispered to my older son that the reason he told the lie was although he knew they would keep beating him, he thought that the bread and water would give him the strength to keep the secret to endure more torture. And so they came back. And so beat him more. I was tied up, on my back, forced to watch, as was my older son. Well Fahdil lied three times. Three times he got bread and water. But the third time, they were onto his trick. They were furious. Now they beat him hard, with the full strength of men. He said to my older son, "I'm dying" he said, "I feel death around me. I want you to take care of my mother and little sister." They thought what more can we do? What can we do to break down this child and his mother?
Meanwhiles, they had taken away my older son, Nahdne, I did not know where. What they did then? Do you notice I have no fan here in my apartment? And it is forty degrees outside and probably forty-five in here?
There was a fan in the torture room. Right above me where I was tied.
They grabbed little Fahdil by his shirt. He was able to look at me one last time, my precious boy, he looked into my eyes with his beautiful sorrowful eyes and he smiled. I said, "I love you my son." He did not scream, he did not even whimper. My son was more brave than many full-grown men, and he was eight years old. They turn him upside down, and then they tie him to the ceiling fan—upside down. They tie him to the ceiling fan and they turn it too fast. So my son. Is spinning. He is spinning round and round. I cannot put into words the feelings inside me.
I was praying and he was praying. We were in the hands of the devil no doubt but we had faith that we would be delivered—faith was all we had. And neither of us will speak. If we give in, we are giving not only our lives but the lives of millions. It would be like giving up Nelson Mandela, you understand? It would be like saying yes; you can go and murder these million children. To save ourselves. And I knew, I was quite certain they would not kill us because it was so deeply in my culture to never harm a pregnant woman or a child. I thought we will survive this. My son will be known forever as the most heroic child ever lived. He will become a great leader. But he kept spinning.
My son who loved to write stories and draw pictures of animals. Who named our black and white cat "Jawhar": "Precious"… loved geckos, gave every one he saw a name, and you know in Iraq they are everywhere, but he had a story for each one, and always hoped to see a cheetah, for there are a few cheetahs in Iraq he would pray to Allah to see
a cheetah and have a running contest for he was a very fast runner… spinning upside down over my face. And still, I did not speak. The baby was turning and turning inside my belly. I fainted many many times that day. After hours and hours of the spinning. My son, of course, was unconscious. And they threw him on the roof. It was cold then. It was winter. He had no coat, of course. And they carried me up to an attic room, just underneath the roof, and tied me down. And still I did not speak. For days and days I lay there, the only thing keeping me breathing, was that I could hear my son coughing on the roof. That gave me such happiness, to hear him cough. I knew he was sick. He probably had even pneumonia, but the coughing meant that he was alive! And as long as he was alive when they let us go I could nurse him to good health again. I was sure they would try to look like good-hearted men, and at the very last minute they would let us go. I was so sure. And that is why. I did not speak. Every hour was like a day, every day like a year, his cough was stronger and louder and then it began to get weaker.
And weaker.
Why did I not speak then?
And weaker still.
And then he did not cough anymore.
Long beat.
They came in, laughing.
"We found your husband anyway you foolish woman. And oh… we are sorry about your son, we were going to let him go today, but he must have had a weak constitution. He is with Allah."
The Palace of the End.
A long silence.
Sucour? Is that the word? For sustenance of the soul? Oh! Alliteration. Like Shakespeare. I like that in English. Not the same in Arabic. Impossible to explain. So. My succour these days is poetries. I am not talented to write it. But I am talented to learn! I have learned much Iraqi poetry by great Iraqi women. I have memorized by heart. I say it out loud. Every day. To my date tree. To the dead who are all with me. To my father, to my mother. To my husband.
And always, of course, to my son.
Long silence.
You might be wondering after that, "Does she still believe in Allah? If she found Allah in the face of her son where is He now? Where are her rivers of faith?"
Isn't my date tree so beautiful? There are more than 300 varieties of dates. Can you imagine? When I was pregnant with my oldest son I wanted to try every kind of date. But I stopped at one hundred. Yes. One hundred. Actually, they all taste pretty much the same but don't tell an Iraqi I said that!!
You know that for hundreds, thousand of years, the dates, together with camel milk was the diet of the Bedouins, just as potatoes was the diet of the Irish.
To harm this tree, it is unforgivable. A military saying from ancient times:Do not kill a woman, a child or an old man. Do not cut a tree.
What happened to that? That is only a joke now. That is "collateral damage."
One of the sights that made my blood freeze during the long Iraq-Iran war in the 1980s was the orchards of date palms with all trees— with their tops taken off. Bare.
Now the U.S. army has torn down thousands of trees on the road leading to the airport. For security they say. But a palm tree is not like your maple tree or your evergreen it cannot hide anybody.
Sound of a bomb.
Of course my faith was gone. The riverbeds were dry. But my soul was not empty and I will tell you why. Many nights I had a dream, that when I would finally die, which happened in the first Gulf War when I was killed, right here, by an American bomb, I would finally again see my son. I knew that he would smile to me just as he did on my darkest day, a smile that said: Forgive. Forgive yourself Mama, because I forgave you. And he takes my hand and together we fly. We fly around Baghdad putting the crowns back on all the date palm trees.
It is very nice, this flying. Just the same as in your dreams. Only better. So we flew. For a while. But after a while he said "Mama, you must go back to Baghdad—and watch over our people, with all the other ghosts. Me, I am a child, so I can go to paradise now. But you, you must watch, because the worst, Mama, the worst is yet to come…. You must watch until there is finally peace. But I will wait for you." And so I am here, watching. With the thousands of other ghosts who are watching with me. There are more every day. Do you see them all? They are everywhere, all around us. And when there is finally peace, Fahdil will come again and we will fly together, we will fly through the crowns of the Nakhla and into the eyes of Allah.
More music, and the three performers stand, somehow communicate with each other, and walk off.