Bonjour, Madame Frenchie. J'm'appelle Evangelique.
Comment vous appelez vous?
Avez vous une chambre ici pour forty dolleurs per nuit pour une lost soldier?
Pas de cockroaches s'il vous plait! (now to the audience) 'Cause I grew up with roaches, dude. Roach shit on the counters every damn morning. Seen roach shit on my toast before! I didn't eat it. Heard roaches poppin every time I went to cook a pizza in the damn oven.
Oh. Speakin of pizza. (She dials.)
Hey there hamsom. Well I think you're hamsom. You goin to pick up lunch today? Well damn, it's your turn soldier. Yes it is. You are teasin me, because I'm PRENINT.
Yes he is, he is kickin like a cancan dancer today. Yeh, mebbe he's gonna be gay thas okay, every girl wants a gay son to go shoppin with aha course I'm kiddin I would drown him in the river if he was that, without a second thought YAH, well listen are you goin to KFC? Or Jimmy's? Okay. Well get me the chicken burger thing, grilled.
No, I don't. I give ya the money when you bring me the food, loser. (She sings.)
Kentucky Fried Chicken finger lickin good…
(She looks at the computer longingly, makes sounds of an inner struggle.)
Ohhhhh…
Don't do it don't do it do not google yourself, girl…
She googles herself, mouthing the spelling of her name as she does. Goes to first site.
Whew! Six hundred thousand on me on Google here. Six hundred thousand.I guess that'd make me famous. WORLD famous.
She reads.
"Are you looking forward to the release of the photos of that soldier getting screwed? By Froggle.""She's the hamster-faced twit in the Iraqi prisoner photos. There are pictures of her getting nailed, and it looks like they are going to be released."
She reads.
"Drown the slut in acid, she should be hogtied, damn she's ugly I'd put my wang in her ass she is the ugliest female I have ever seen drown that bitch in acid I'd rather cut her head off and fuck her neck hole, show her a fucking donkey, she's inbred poor white trash from West Virginia! Did she get beated with an ugly stick? That soldier's my kind of girl stupid and willing to please—we need more like her and fewer like Hilary and Laura kappa kappa kunts! She's a trailer whore; even a dog wouldn't hump her! She needs her hole beat oh so hard, I think she's HOT! Stupid egocentric pitiful excuse for a human being and worst of all a feminist! I want to fuck her, kill her by fucking her continuously, cut her buttocks into four parts fuck each part fuck to the mouth tear out her vagina."
Whoa. I guess if I was an actor I would call that a bad review. A real bad review.
Long beat.
You must all be liberals, what wrote them comments on me. PEACE PINHEADS.
Pink cotton candy cowards afraid of bein at war.
Afraid of your own SHADOW.
Tell me how much you care about them Iraqi men when they are sawin the head off a one of our boys. Tell me fuckin that.
If all of you was right here in front of me now what I would say to you is one thing above all: I am NOT ugly. I am at least a six and a half out of ten I was voted a six and a half outta ten at my school, it was just a real skanky picture. I could shoot that damn photographer! You just take out your driver's license or your passport and tell me if you don't look ugly. I hate ugly women, women who don't take care of themselves I am not that woman. I have always took care of myself. And strong? I am like piano wire. I could see if I was fat y'all hatin me so much, but I don't have an ounce of fat on me.
So what gives? What gives, dudes? I am not an ugly girl and I am definitely not nor have I ever been a feminist. I hate feminists, man, now feminists are UGLY.
Thas why they don't like men, they can't get theyselves a man. Is that why you think I am a feminist because I am a soldier? I am a soldier because I love my country.
Because I grew up singin "God Bless America" every single day of my life.
And pledgin allegiance to the flag…
…every ever lovin day of my twenty-three years and so when I seen the call, when the recruiters come to town so handsome and real nice talking to me so nice like Tom Hanks style I said "sure, I'll do whatever it takes to protect my country." I wasn't doin nothing anyways, just working at the Dairy Queen. "Hello how are you today? We got Peanut Buster Parfait, Strawberry Sundees, Brownie Explosion." Hell, I wasn't doin nothing for my country working at the Dairy Queen except makin it fat. And there was no way in hell I was going back to work at that chicken factory. So I signed up that day. (She sings/chants:)
"I used to be the high school queen. Now I got my M16." That there is a jodie; a kind of motivational chant we sing in the army. Or: "Walkin tall and looking good, ought to march in Hollywood. Lift your head and hold it high, 3rd platoon is marching by. Close your eyes and hang your head we are marching by the dead." That one is sad, you know, respectful. And then? There is: "Flyin low and feeling mean. Find a family by the stream. Pick 'em off and hear 'em scream, Napalm sticks to kids." Shhh. We ain't supposed to say that one no more but we do, 'cause, well it's tradition,8just part of being in the Army. And hey, we don't really mean that, most of us love kids, if kids gets hurt, we feel real bad.
Pause, does busy work.
If things don't go well for me in court, I am up shit creek. Me and my boo, up the shitty crik.
I am no feminista.
And… I… am… not ugly.
Man I tole my sister when she went on Larry King to tell him that that is a bad picture that I do not look like that and she forgot!! My blood just boils thinking that that homely picture is how everyone thinks I look. And that makes Charley look bad, right? That he got it on with a dog. Thas why he has cut me off. I've written him fifty-two letters since he went to military prison, but he don't answer them. I tole him in the letter, I will wait for you the whole eight years, you takin the heat for Condoleeza me and the baby, 'cause the love we found in Abu G. is like Romeo and Juliet.
And we was makin our little G.I. I hate the media for makin you ashamed. Ashamed of being with an ugly girl. That burns me more than any other part. Your daddy is a war hero. He gonna get a purple heart eventually, that's what someone who I will not name in very high up position tole me that we would eventually get citations for service to military intelligence and even medals because we are takin the fall. I am willing oh yes I will take the fall for my country any ole day. I am like Joan of ARC being burned at the stake. With them pictures and the whole world wide web hatin me and havin to be a secretary I took the fall but I am not goin to prison I'm going to QUEBEC. Yah, I gotta plan to excape to Canada, I'mona lie under a truckload of Hostess cupcakes or field tomatoes and I'm goin into exile like Napoleon; and like Napoleon, I will return one day, an American hero.
I seen an angel.
I had a lot of hash in me but I seen an angel with eagle wings flying, soaring through Abu Ghraib on that night. And that vision assured me that vanquishing the enemy, vanquishing evil was what I was born to do.
None of them higher ups have spoke to me since it all came crashin down on my head. Since they moved me here to push around paper; I been waitin on their call, but the only person ever calls me is Mommy. And my lawyer. He says I am a scapegoat. And he won't let me up on the stand because I won't act like I'm retarded, which is what he wants me to do, so I won't be held accountable; I'll tell the truth. And that is not what anyone wants to hear.
Wonder if I'll be sentenced to jail for eight years like Charley. It's funny, you know, if things had gone different for me, insteada working in an office and waitin for my trial I mighta had a TV movie made about me, too. She is truly a hero she is, and hey, did you know she's from West Virginia too? Yeah. I reckon Jessica Lynch is America's sweetheart. I am America's secret that got shouted out to the world. And they is not happy about that, not at all.
And that is why they gonna make an example of me.
But one day, I'mona be in the history books. You wait and see.
I'mona be a war hero; like Annie Oakley.
I was in that in high school, Annie Get your Gun, I was one of the chorus singing; our lead was real good, Lisa? She tried for "American Idol": "Anything you can do I can do better, I can do anything better 'n you." Or what's that one from Oklahoma? "I'm just a girl who caint say no, I'm in a terrible twist.
"I am going to be remembered. But first, we gotta find a way to somehow, make them pictures disappear. 'Cause: The thing about them… pictures.
I look at her, me, that homely little private with the thumbs up.
And the naked Iraqi men,
And…. Well it's like a dream they are telling me I had?
But I don't remember it like that?
And they are sayin: "no this is the dream you had"!
Because they can doctor pictures you know. They can do anything they please.
And those forces that do not want
Girls in the army—wanted the world to see them pictures.
Okay, okay, I'mona be honest with you… in the fact of it,
That is what I did, for one second they said "give us the thumbs up, baby."
So that's what I did. For one second of a whole year, dudes. And that is what everyone sees? How would you like your weirdest second, like, played out over and over all over the world… for all of time, dude?
Like those dreams about yourself where ya did something WEIRD something you would never do? And ya wake up and ya feel uneasy and you are glad that nobody was lookin in your dream? And ya just wanna forget it and ya do, because dreams, they just disappear, don't they?
Long beat.
I'll tell you what most people don't know. It got a hell of a lot worse than that.
That is for pussies. So what they were naked? So? They get naked every time they have a shower. So? And as far as me laughin and pointing at the guy's willie? Well tie me down if that's the worst thing that happened to 'em in Abu G. they be lovin it.
But that is not the style of girl I am, okay? I respect men and their privates and I do not nor have I ever laughed at a man's willie. But these are not men, they are terrorists.
And they had intelligence. They knew who was gonna blow up who and as far as I am concerned I was doin what had to be done, to get to the intelligence and that is, according to their culture, me laughin at their willies was worse than a beatin way worse. I was softening them up; like you might put out hard butter on the windowsill. I was doin' what I was trained to do! I had a smile on my face but this was SERIOUS—INTELLIGENCE—WORK.
And I am very proud to say that the naked human pyramids WAS ALL MY IDEA.
Actually, it's the first thing that come to my mind when I walked into that prison and seen all them men that look exactly alike. I know what might be fun: HUMAN PYRAMID WITH NIKKID CAPTIVE MEN. Because I always did have an interest in11choreography, you know? I see people dance, I wanna go in an mould 'em.
And they might not have liked it, but they have learned something useful. If they teach gym, in a school. Or supervise a cheerleading squad.
We was not entertaining ourselves. We was breaking down the terrorists.
And it worked. We did attain information.
And the other…
Takin the guy around on a leash?
Well he called me a dog.
Yes he did. Just like all you losers on the net. Like all those assholes back in Fort Ashby. He knew a little English and he called me a dog so for once in my life I could fuckin give it to him you think I'm a dog? You think I'm a fucking dog you monkey? Let's go for a fuckin walk you wanna go for a walk? And Charley and them is laughing and well, I never got laughs before I am not a funny person, and WOW man, getting laughs is the best high the guys was laughing dudes, they loved it, so they go: "Put him on the leash." And I do like a sketch, like "Saturday Night Live," like "Oh my God it's time to take the dog for a walk… hey Mom? Did you take the dog for a walk? Henry? Henry. Did you walk the dog nobody walked the damn dog I'm walkin' it. Here dog, ya dirty dog. No treat for you today you been a bad dog." And I'm pullin him… I was surprised how different is a human neck from a dog neck. With dogs you can pull and pull and they just keep on going not with humans. They necks is soft.
And… well…. It is a weird feeling—made my breathing go—a little funny. Shallow. My voice kinda got full of breath. And I felt like that—Alice in Wonderland from the Disney movie? Where everything was not real and I could walk out anytime and what was behind there would stay there.
I had that over someone else once and that was—Lee Ann Wibby; she was missin' a leg? And she wanted friends so bad and she smelled and she was weird and ugly? Now she was ugly, so nobody liked her. So we was bored so we axed her to come to the clubhouse and she come with her backpack and her nightie she thought it was a sleep-over12birthday and we made her strip and bark like a dog and even lick Ryan's dickie, and there was a moment that I realized she would do anything we said. Anything at all. We burned her clothes? And we took her fake leg off, and chopped it up—okay, I know it sounds terrible but we didn't chop up her flesh leg or nothing—and then we tole her to start crawlin home.
Beat, where she struggles with guilt.
Once in church, we hadda think upon our sins? And I seen her there, she was in the church, and she turn around and she looks at me. And I knew then, that what all happened at the clubhouse had been more than a joke for her. Well sir, I love God with all my heart and Jesus is my Lord so I did pray for forgiveness about Lee Ann Wibby—but dudes, Lee Ann Wibby is an American, she was very VERY different from the APES AT ABU GHRAIB. They was monsters in the shape of human beings. They was prisoners of WAR.
So, there I was, little me, in ABU GHRAIB me who'd been workin in the Dairy Queen in Fort Ashby, who had been fired several times from the Dairy Queen, for messin up the Brownie Explosion and I was the BIG boss of these BIG DEAL TERRORISTS, guys who had KILLED AMERICANS. GUYS WHO WERE PLANNING ANOTHER 9/11, dude, AND YOU ARE UPSET THAT I laughed AT THEIR WILLIES
Beat.
Like I said: We did a hell of a lot worse than what you seen. Or what you heard. What YOU seen is tiddlywinks: we made a man masturbate. Ohhhhh. So SCARY!!! SO? So WHAT? So the frick what? I'll tell you I didn't do nothing to them Iraqis that hadn't been done to me many times at the clubhouse. By my friends, and they still my friends. Yeah. I'm not mad at 'em, it was just a little fun.
Some of the churchier girls'd look down on me for that but hey at least I'm BUSY ON A SATURDAY NIGHT, at least I got a date.
Beat.
See I guess I'm a bit of a martyr. Like them pretty eye Palestinian girls who wear the scarf and walk into a supermarket and blow theyselves up? THAS what I done; I done blew myself up.
I ain't here no more.
See… they didn't like me at first. Charley, and Bruno, and Francis.
Wayne, Ry, all the guys, I walked in? They started with the comments.
Okay, you know what I'm sayin, like I should be cleanin or cookin and what am I doin in the hardest ass prison how I'm gonna wussy out. They didn't like me, they wouldn't talk to me; they stole my food, they hung me upside down, poured water on me in the night. Then they seen what I could do. They seen I was tough. I was as tough and as bad assed as they was. I wudn't afraid of no Saddamite. I may be a little girl from West Virginia but once I was out of the gate and through the lookin glass I just thought of bein in the shack with Lee Ann Wibby and I thought of the Twin Towers and all them people running and I thought I'm takin your soul first. I'm takin your soul down like a big saw can take a hundred-year-old tree down; I'm buzzin you down 'til you ain't got shit left 'til you ain't even human. And then I'mona take you down further.
And then, when we good and ready, we blow your brains out.
And we laugh while we are doin it. Make no mistake.
Because we are rejoicing.
In defeating. The enemy.
Of freedom.
Long beat.
And so Charley and them, they started to think I was okay.
Pattin me on the back, it was like camp.
It was like workin a farm in a way. The animals you gotta just handle.
You gotta do what you gotta do, slaughter the pigs, herd the cattle,
I mean guys like Charley never looked at me back home. Suddenly, a cute guy had a woody for me. I couldn't b'lieve it. I like the way he called me he always said "Private Sexy" like that? With this wicked smile make me melt—so we started doin it up down and sideways, yes, sometimes in front of the RAKEES. Just to fuck 'em up, it made Charley harder when they was watchin and I am NO prude never have been and so he got Ry and Wayne to tape us and at first I was a little shy, but he said "please," he would need it when he was away from me, when he was lonely, he could just pop in the tape and he be fine. so I said, "Okay, for my Romeo," and I let them tape. I just pretended they wasn't there, an I ask you, is there a girl in America that has not been videotaped doin the you know what? It's human nature innit?
Silence, reflection.
They didn't say a word man, everyone ax me wha'd they said when you was trippin on 'em but they didn't say—hardly nothing. It was just this silence. Make me feel weird, that silence, you know? This thought run through me once, with that silence? From the History Channel, when the Nazi's there? Made the Jews run. They always had to run everywhere, and so they would run, without sayin anything, with this look on they face that is what the RAKEES had they had that look that is what Lee Ann Wibby had when we was choppin up her leg. Made me feel weird. Made me feel…
One of 'em, who the other ones seem to look up to? I think he was like, a holy man. Ronnie goes to him: "Hey you. Wise man, mullah. Fuck him, fuck your friend there in the butt, man! Do it now," and the translator tells him and the guy, he speaks English anyways, right? So he turns around and says, in this soft doctor voice:
"There is no reason for this. This I will not do for your entertainment."
So you know what Ronnie does? He hadda take a shit so he takes it right there in a bucket hands it to the man, the guy who spoke English, and Ronnie makes him… eat his shit! Starts shootin at his feet. "Eat it, eat it, teacher." So he eats… Ronnie's shit and that shit stink, dude. The funniest was Ry; he gets the other Rakee to kiss the holy man with his mouth full of shit? And Manny throws up. Oh my God we razzed Manny about that all night!!
She reflects for a moment, and to her surprise, a feeling of remorse wells up inside her. She remembers the man speaking—both David Kelly and Nehrjas look at her.
"There is no reason for this. This I will not do for your entertainment." Him sayin that, won't leave my head, you know? I wake up in the night sometimes, hearin him say that. I have to take a Percocet, make that go away.
This paper pushin is so damn boring! I am a mover, dude, I likes to move all the time you never see me sittin any time of day, that's what my mom always said "That girl don't sit unless she shits." I think I am messin it up, too.
Silence.
"JUMP ON THE CAT."
That's what he said my best friend Ray it was on Easter Sunday? I had on my lilac dress and my little white shoes my hair was permed and I ask him how does he like my new lilac dress innit pretty? He goes: "Jump on the cat." Cat's there, breathin too fast, I don't know what Ray done and I'm like "NO, I don't wanna mess my shoes," he's like "JUMP ON THE CAT."
So I takes off my shoes and…
So soft. Like the Rakee's neck. Like Lee Ann Wibby. Same feeling in my stomach. Same feelin in my heart. Same fast breathin… like the Rakees when we was…
"There is no reason for this…"
I am thinking very serious about splittin, don't tell nobody. I'm goin to Canada. To French Canada just gonna blend right in. In Quebec City won't nobody know me, they like Americans there! I say I run away from the Mafia. I'll get a nice French Canadian guy, a Pierre, to take me in. An I could have the baby, and we could bring him up Eskimo.
They take me to prison, they take away the baby.
And they take away my baby. Over my dead body.
And I could work in his corner store. Depanneur. I seen it in the Quebec dictionary.
I would like that. Sellin cigarettes. And candy bars. And milk. And bread. And the baby grow up to a little French Canadian, but really an American boy, help out his mom. Same customers every day. " Bonjour, Madame Claudine! Comment savah ?" Nobody knows me. And every morning, when I get up and start the café, I will pledge allegiance to the flag; I will pray to my American God. And I will make American coffee and when I look in the mirror, to wash my face, I will take a minute to go back through the lookin glass. To those secret nights when my breathing went funny and there was dry ice in my heart and I did GOOD for my country. I said NO to the enemy.
I said you don't MESS with the eagle you don't MESS with the eagle, dude or the eagle tear your eyes out and that's what I did I tore 'em out and I flew, man, for just that night I flew through Abu G. my wingspan like a football field.
And I soared through the air.
Long silence.
'Til I crashed back.
Through the lookin glass.
Fade to black.